Games related to, derived from or inspired by chess
A three-player chess variant which uses a hexagonal board
A chess variant is a game related to, derived from, or inspired by chess.[1] Such variants can differ from chess in many different ways.
"International" or "Western" chess itself is one of a family of games which have related origins and could be considered variants of each other. Chess developed from chaturanga, from which other members of this family, such as ouk chatrang, shatranj, Tamerlane chess,
shogi, and xiangqi also evolved.[2]
Many chess variants are designed to be played with the equipment of regular chess.[3] Most variants have a similar public-domain status as their parent game, but some have been made into commercial proprietary games. Just as in traditional chess, chess variants can be played over the board, by correspondence, or by computer. Some internet chess servers facilitate the play of some variants in addition to orthodox chess.
In the context of chess problems, chess variants are called heterodox chess or fairy chess.[4][5] Fairy chess variants tend to be created for problem composition rather than actual play.
There are thousands of known chess variants (see list of chess variants). The Classified Encyclopedia of Chess Variants catalogues around two thousand, with the preface noting that—since creating a chess variant is relatively trivial—many were considered insufficiently notable for inclusion.[6]


Evolution of chess[edit]






a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h




8

















8


7

















7


6

















6


5

















5


4

















4


3

















3


2

















2


1

















1




a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h




Chaturanga starting setup.[7] Chaturanga is believed to be the origin of all games in the chess family.


See also: History of chess
The origins of the chess family of games can be traced to the game of chaturanga during the time of the Gupta Empire in India.[2] Over time, as the game spread geographically, modified versions of the rules became popular in different regions. In Sassanid Persia, a slightly modified form became known as shatranj. Modifications made to this game in Europe resulted in the modern game. Courier chess was a popular variant in medieval Europe, which had a significant impact on the "main" variant's development.[2]
Other games in the chess family, such as shogi (Japan), xiangqi (China),
and ouk chatran (Cambodian) are also developments from chaturanga made in other regions. These related games are considered chess variants[citation needed], though the majority of variants are, expressly, modifications of chess. The basic rules of chess were not standardized until the 19th century, and the history of chess before this involves many variants, with the most popular modifications spreading and eventually forming the modern game.

Types of variants[edit]
See also: List of chess variants
While some regional variants have historical origins comparable to or even older than chess, the majority of variants are express attempts by individuals or small groups to create new games with chess as a starting point. In most cases the creators are attempting to create new games of interest to chess enthusiasts or a wider audience. Variants normally have the same public domain status as chess, though a few (such as Knightmare Chess) are proprietary, and the materials for play are released as commercial products.
The variations from chess may be done to address a perceived issue with the standard game. For example, Chess960, which randomises the starting positions, was introduced as Fischer Random Chess by Bobby Fischer to combat what he perceived to be the detrimental dominance of opening preparation in chess.[8] Several variants introduce complications to the standard game, providing an additional challenge for experienced players, for example in Kriegspiel, where players cannot see the pieces of their opponent.
The table below details some, but not all, of the ways in which variants can differ from the orthodox game:



Some ways in which chess variants can differ from regular chess, with examples


Difference from regular chess

Example variant


Different starting position

Chess960 – starting position randomly selected from 960 possible options


Non-standard pieces

Almost chess – uses chancellors (which can move as a rook or a knight) instead of queens


Different victory conditions

Losing chess – objective is to lose all one's pieces


Players have incomplete information regarding the game state

Kriegspiel – players cannot see the pieces of their opponent, and have to deduce or guess where they are likely to be


Elements of chance

Dice chess – dice rolls determine which pieces can move on a turn


Non-identical setup for white and black

Dunsany's chess – pits a regular chess army versus a large army consisting only of pawns


Different sized or shaped board

Infinite chess – the board is unbounded


Multiple boards

Alice chess – pieces switch between the two boards when they move


More dimensions in which pieces can move

Three-dimensional chess – playing board is in three dimensions


Board other than lattice of squares

Triangular chess – playing board is 96 triangular cells


Non-standard number of players

Quatrochess – played with four players


Different rules

Crazyhouse – the captured pieces can be dropped on the board as one's own

Models for the fairy chess pieces used in Capablanca chess
Variants can themselves be developed into further sub-variants, for example Horde chess is a variation upon Dunsany's Chess.[9]
Some variations are created for the purpose of composing interesting puzzles, rather than being intended for full games. This field of composition is known as fairy chess.
Fairy chess gave rise to the term "fairy chess piece" which is used more broadly across writings about chess variants to describe chess pieces with movement rules other than those of the standard chess pieces. Forms of standardised notation have been devised to systematically describe the movement of these. A distinguishing feature of several chess variants is the presence of one or more fairy pieces. Physical models of common fairy pieces are sold by major chess set suppliers.[10]

Notable inventors[edit]
See also: Category:Chess variant inventors
Several chess masters have developed variants, such as Chess960 (introduced as Fischer Random Chess) by Bobby Fischer, Capablanca Chess by José Raúl Capablanca, and Seirawan chess by Yasser Seirawan.
Individuals notable for creating multiple chess variants include V. R. Parton (best known for Alice chess), Ralph Betza, Philip M. Cohen and George R. Dekle Sr.
Some board game designers, notable for works across a wider range of board games, have created chess variants. These include Robert Abbott (Baroque chess) and Andy Looney (Martian chess).

Play[edit]
While chess, shogi, and xiangqi have professional circuits as well as many organised tournaments for amateurs, play of chess variants is predominately on a casual basis.
A few variants have had significant tournaments. Several Gliński's hexagonal chess tournaments were played at the height of the variant's popularity in the 1970s and 1980s. Chess960 has also been the subject of tournaments, including in 2018 an "unofficial world championship" between reigning World Chess Champion Magnus Carlsen and fellow high-ranking Grandmaster Hikaru Nakamura.[11] Likewise Crazyhouse has seen prize-funded unofficial world championship tournaments with top grandmasters and experts of the game on chess.com and lichess.
Several internet chess servers facilitate live play of popular variants, including Chess.com,[12] Lichess,[13] and the Free Internet Chess Server.[14] The software packages Zillions of Games and Fairy-Max have been programmed to support many chess variants.[15][16]
Some chess engines are also able to play a handful of variants, for instance the version of Stockfish implemented on Lichess is able to play Crazyhouse, King-of-the-hill, Three-check chess, Atomic chess, Horde chess, and Racing Kings.[17] The AI included in Zillions of Games is able to play almost any variant correctly programmed within it to a reasonable standard.[16] Some variants, such as 5D Chess with Multiverse Time Travel, are implausible or even impossible to play physically and exist primarily as video games.

Analysis and study[edit]
Notation[edit]
Play in most chess variants is sufficiently similar to chess that games can be recorded with algebraic notation, although additions to this are often required. For example, the third dimension in Millennium 3D Chess means that move notation needs to include the level number, as well as the rank and file—N2g3 means a knight move to the g3 square on the second level. When fairy chess pieces are used, notation requires assigning letters for those pieces.

Scholarship and cataloguing[edit]
Various publications have been written regarding chess variants. Variant Chess magazine was published from 1990 to 2010, being an official publication of the British Chess Variants Society from 1997. This outlined and introduced multiple variants, as well as containing in-depth analyses.[18]
A leading figure in the field was David Pritchard, who authored several books on the topic. Most significantly, he compiled an encyclopedia of variants which outlined thousands of different games. Following Pritchard's death in 2005, the second edition of the encyclopedia was completed and published by John Beasley under the title The Classified Encyclopedia of Chess Variants.[19]
A recent overview of historical and some modern variants was published under the title of A World of Chess in 2017.[20]
The Chess Variant Pages website includes a constantly expanding catalogue of variants.

Computer variant chess[edit]



abcdef
665544332211abcdef

Final position in a Los Alamos chess game between MANIAC I (white) and a chess beginner (black). MANIAC I managed to checkmate its inexperienced opponent in the first instance of a computer defeating a human at a chess-like game.


See also: Computer chess
A few chess variants have been the subject of significant computational analysis. Los Alamos chess, a 6×6 variant, was created in 1956 expressly for computers, its simplicity meant that it was possible for the MANIAC I computer to play it, with a victory over a beginner player the first instance of a computer winning a chess-like game against human opposition.[21] Conversely, Arimaa was developed in 2003 to be deliberately resistant to computer analysis while easy for human players, though computers were able to comprehensively surpass human players by 2015.[22]
While solving chess has not yet been achieved, some variants have been found to be simple enough to be solved through computer analysis. The 5×5 Gardner's Minichess variant has been weakly solved as a draw,[23] and a lengthy analysis of losing chess managed to weakly solve this as a win for white.[24]

Chess variants in fiction[edit]
Chess variants have been invented in various fiction.[25] In The Chessmen of Mars author Edgar Rice Burroughs describes Jetan which depicts a war between two races of Martian. An appendix fully defines the rules of the game. More commonly specifics of fictional variants are not detailed in the original works, though several have been codified into playable games by fans. An example of this is Tri-Dimensional Chess from Star Trek. On-screen play was not conducted to any specific rules, but a comprehensive rulebook has been since developed.[2] Another well known example of fictional chess-like game are the Star Wars holochess, or dejarik.[26]
Chess boxing, a hybrid sport of chess and boxing, was depicted in Froid Équateur, a 1992 comic by Enki Bilal and was developed into a real sport in the early 21st century.
Fictional chess variants can involve fantastical or dangerous elements that cannot be implemented in real life. The Chessmen of Mars describes a form of Jetan where the pieces are human beings and captures are replaced by fights to the death between them. The Doctor Who episode "The Wedding of River Song" depicts "Live Chess", which introduces potentially lethal electric currents into the game.

See also[edit]
List of chess variants
Shogi variant
Xiangqi variant
Janggi variant
References[edit]


^ Pritchard (1994), p. vii

^ a b c d "The History of Chess Variants". www.chessvariants.com. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ "Where Can I Find Equipment or Opponents for Chess Variants?". www.chessvariants.com. Retrieved 2018-09-18. Many Chess variants, particularly those called Modest variants, can be played with a regular Chess set.

^ "Chess - Chess composition". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2018-09-21.

^ "A Glossary of Basic Chess Variant Terms". www.chessvariants.com. Retrieved 2018-09-21.

^ Pritchard (2007), p. 13.

^ "The History Of Chess". ChessZone. Retrieved 29 March 2011.

^ Seirawan, Yasser; Stefanovic, George (1992). "Sveti Stefan; First Press Conference". No Regrets • Fischer–Spassky 1992. International Chess Enterprises. p. 17. ISBN 978-1-879479-09-8.

^ Pritchard (2007), p. 90.

^ Duniho, Fergus. "Chess Variant Kits from the House of Staunton". www.chessvariants.com. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ "Day 5 - Decisions, emotions, conclusions - Fischer Random 2018". Fischer Random 2018. 2018-02-15. Archived from the original on 2018-02-21. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ "Chess Variants | 5 Amazing Examples". Chess.com. Archived from the original on 2018-07-19. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ "Lichess variants • lichess.org". lichess.org. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ FICS. "FICS Help: category". www.freechess.org. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Muller, H. G. "The Chess Variant Pages: Fairy-Max: an AI for playing user-defined Chess variants". The Chess Variant Pages. Retrieved 2018-09-19.

^ a b "Review of Zillions-of-Games". www.chessvariants.com. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ "Stockfish is learning". lichess.org. Retrieved 2018-09-14.

^ "British Chess Variants Society". www.mayhematics.com. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Pritchard (2007).

^ Cazaux & Knowlton (2017).

^ Pritchard (2007), p. 112.

^ "The 2015 Arimaa Challenge". arimaa.com. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Mhalla, Mehdi; Prost, Frederic (2013-07-26). "Gardner's Minichess Variant is solved". arXiv:1307.7118 [cs.GT].

^ Watkins, Mark. "Losing Chess: 1. e3 wins for White" (PDF).

^ Brown, David W. (2013-03-25). "22 Games of Chess in Fantasy and Science Fiction". Metal Floss. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ "Star Wars' Holochess Game Was Really Thought Out". CINEMABLEND. 2018-09-22. Retrieved 2021-05-01.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chess variants.

Bibliography

Cazaux, Jean-Louis; Knowlton, Rick (2017). A World of Chess: Its Development and Variations Through Centuries and Civilizations. McFarland. ISBN 978-0786494279.
Gollon, John (1968). Chess Variations • Ancient, Regional, and Modern. Charles E. Tuttle Company Inc. LCCN 06811975.
Pritchard, D. B. (1994). The Encyclopedia of Chess Variants. Games & Puzzles Publications. ISBN 978-0-9524142-0-9.
Pritchard, D. B. (2000). Popular Chess Variants. Batsford Chess Books. ISBN 978-0-7134-8578-3.
Pritchard, D. B. (2007). Beasley, John (ed.). The Classified Encyclopedia of Chess Variants (PDF). John Beasley. ISBN 978-0-9555168-0-1.
vteChessOutline
Chess theory
Chess titles
Grandmaster
Computer chess
glossary
matches
engines
software
Correspondence chess
FIDE
Glossary
Online chess
Premove
Internet chess server
list
Rating system
world rankings
norms
Variants
List
World records
Equipment
Chess set
chessboard
Dubrovnik chess set
Staunton chess set
Chess pieces
King
Queen
Rook
Bishop
Knight
Pawn
Fairy
Chess clock
Chess table
Score sheets
History
Timeline
Versus de scachis
Göttingen manuscript
Charlemagne chessmen
Lewis chessmen
Romantic chess
Hypermodernism
Soviet chess school
Top player comparison
Geography of chess
Africa
South Africa
China
Europe
Armenia
Spain
India
Notable games
List of chess players
amateurs
female
grandmasters
Women in chess
Transgender people in chess
Chess museums
Bobby Fischer Center
Gökyay Association Chess Museum
World Chess Hall of Fame
Rules
Castling
Cheating in chess
Check
Checkmate
Draw
by agreement
Fifty-move rule
Perpetual check
Stalemate
Threefold repetition
En passant
Pawn promotion
Time control
Fast chess
Touch-move rule
White and Black
Terms
Blunder
Chess notation
algebraic
descriptive
PGN
annotation symbols
symbols in Unicode
Fianchetto
Gambit
Key square
King walk
Open file
Half-open file
Outpost
Pawns
backward
connected
doubled
isolated
passed
Swindle
Tempo
Transposition
Trap
Tactics
Artificial castling
Battery
Alekhine's gun
Block
Checkmate patterns
Combination
Decoy
Deflection
Desperado
Discovered attack
Double check
Fork
Interference
Overloading
Pawn storm
Pin
Sacrifice
Queen sacrifice
Skewer
Undermining
Windmill
X-ray
Zwischenzug
Strategy
Compensation
Exchange
the exchange
Initiative
first-move advantage
Middlegame
Pawn structure
Hedgehog
Isolated Queen's Pawn
Maróczy Bind
Minority attack
Piece values
Prophylaxis
School of chess
OpeningsFlank opening
Benko Opening
Bird's Opening
Dunst Opening
English Opening
Grob's Attack
Larsen's Opening
Zukertort Opening
King's Indian Attack
Réti Opening
King's Pawn Game
Alekhine's Defence
Caro–Kann Defence
French Defence
Modern Defence
Nimzowitsch Defence
Open Game
Four Knights Game
Giuoco Piano
Italian Game
King's Gambit
Petrov's Defence
Philidor Defence
Ponziani Opening
Ruy Lopez
Semi-Italian Opening
Scotch Game
Two Knights Defense
Vienna Game
Owen's Defence
Pirc Defence
Austrian Attack
Scandinavian Defense
Sicilian Defence
Alapin
Dragon/Accelerated Dragon
Najdorf
Scheveningen
Queen's Pawn Game
Budapest Gambit
Colle System
Dutch Defence
English Defence]]
Indian Defence
Benoni Defence
Modern Benoni
Bogo-Indian Defence
Catalan Opening
Grünfeld Defence
King's Indian Defence
Nimzo-Indian Defence
Old Indian Defense
Queen's Indian Defence
London System
Richter–Veresov Attack
Queen's Gambit
Accepted
Declined
Slav Defence
Semi-Slav Defence
Chigorin Defense
Torre Attack
Trompowsky Attack
Other
List of openings
theory table
List of chess gambits
Irregular
Bongcloud Attack
Fool's mate
Scholar's mate
Endgames
Bishop and knight checkmate
King and pawn vs. king
Opposite-coloured bishops
Pawnless endgame
Queen and pawn vs. queen
Queen vs. pawn
Queen vs. rook
Rook and bishop vs. rook
Rook and pawn vs. rook
Lucena position
Philidor position
Strategy
fortress
opposition
Tarrasch rule
triangulation
Zugzwang
Study
Tablebase
Two knights endgame
Wrong bishop
Wrong rook pawn
Tournaments
List of strong chess tournaments
Chess Olympiad
Women
World Chess Championship
List
Candidates Tournament
Chess World Cup
FIDE Grand Prix
Other world championships
Women
Team
Rapid
Blitz
Junior
Youth
Senior
Amateur
Chess composition
Solving
Computer chess championships
CCC
CSVN
North American
TCEC
WCCC
WCSCC
Art and media
Caïssa
Chess aesthetics
Chess in the arts
early literature
film
novels
paintings
poetry
short stories
Chess books
opening books
endgame literature
Oxford Companion
Chess libraries
Chess newspaper columns
Chess periodicals
Related
Arbiter
Chess boxing
Chess club
Chess composer
Chess engine
AlphaZero
Deep Blue
Leela Chess Zero
Stockfish
Chess problem
glossary
joke chess
Chess prodigy
Elo rating system
Simultaneous exhibition
Tie-breaking in Swiss-system tournaments
Solving chess

 Chess portal
Category

vteChess variants (list)Orthodox rulesDifferent starting position
Fischer random chess
Displacement chess
Transcendental chess
Different number of pieces
Dunsany's chess
Handicap
Unorthodox board
Balbo's game
Circular chess
Cylinder chess
Double chess
Grid chess
Hexagonal chess (Cross chess, Masonic chess)
Infinite chess
Millennium 3D chess
Minichess (Los Alamos chess)
Rhombic chess
Spherical chess
Three-dimensional chess
Triangular chess
Unorthodoxrules withtraditionalpiecesStandard8×8 board
Andernach chess
Atomic chess
Beirut chess
Checkless chess
Chessplus
Circe chess
Crazyhouse
Cubic chess
Dynamo chess
Extinction chess
Hostage chess
Knight relay chess
Legan chess
Losing chess
Madrasi chess
Monochromatic chess
Patrol chess
PlunderChess
Portal chess
Progressive chess
Three-check chess
Way of the Knight
Multimove variants
Avalanche chess
Kung-Fu Chess
Marseillais chess
Monster chess
Progressive chess
Elements of chance
Dark chess
Dice chess
Knightmare Chess
Kriegspiel
Penultima
Unorthodox rules onan unorthodox board
Alice chess
Apocalypse
Chad
Chessence
Congo
Diplomat chess
Dragonfly
Jeson Mor
Parallel worlds chess
Rollerball
5D Chess with Multiverse Time Travel
Unorthodoxrules usingnon-traditionalpiecesStandard 8×8 board
Baroque
Berolina
Chakra
Chess with different armies
Duell
Falcon–hunter chess
Grasshopper chess
Musketeer chess
Pocket mutation chess
Cheskers
Compound pieces
Almost chess
Capablanca chess
Capablanca random chess
Chancellor chess
Embassy chess
Grand Chess
Janus Chess
Maharajah and the Sepoys
Modern chess
Seirawan chess
Tutti-frutti chess
Unorthodoxboards and pieces
Chesquerque
Chess on a really big board
Courier-Spiel
Dragonchess
Gess
Omega Chess
Stratomic
Dekle's triangular chess
2000 A.D.
Wildebeest chess
Wolf chess
Multiplayer
Bosworth
Bughouse chess
Business chess
Djambi
Duchess
Enochian chess
Forchess
Fortress chess
Four Fronts
Four-player chess
Gala
Hand and brain
Quatrochess
Three-man chess
Three-player chess
Tri-chess
Inspired games
Arimaa
Jetan
Martian chess
Navia Dratp
The Duke
Chess-relatedgamesHistorical
Chadarangam
Chaturaji
Chaturanga
Courier chess
Grant Acedrex
Shatranj
Short assize
Tamerlane chess
Regional
Janggi
variants
Makruk
Senterej
Shatar
Shogi
Chu shogi
Dai shogi
Other variants
Sittuyin
Xiangqi
Jungle
Banqi
Manchu chess
Game of the Three Kingdoms
Game of the Three Friends
Game of the Seven Kingdoms
Other variants
Software
ChessV
Fairy-Max
XBoard
Zillions of Games
Related
Correspondence chess
Fairy chess
Fairy chess piece
Fairy Chess Review
The Chess Variant Pages




